README.markdown, before:

TreeBundle
==========

Let:

* Tree = Rooted Tree
* Node = Rooted Tree Node

The Tree structure is currently designed with only two models, the Node and the Tree.
The Tree is a Composite for the Node, and may compose with a variety of traits, the only one actually coded being ComposeWithRootNode.

Question: Proper Tree/Node hierarchy ?

- Tree extends Node
  - currently working
  - When expecting Tree (eg: drivers), cannot pass a Node
  - confusing, by stating a Tree *is* a Node.
- Node extends Tree
  - + correct, a Node *is* a (sub)Tree
  - + a Node has Tree capabilities
  - + don't need ComposeWithRootNode
  - + can pass a Node where a Tree is expected
  - - cannot pass a Tree where a Node is expected
  - - some method names don't make sense for Tree (getSibling, getParent, etc)
  - - Tree cannot have methods Node has not, like ... what ?
- Node extends Nodable and Tree extends Nodable
  - Nodable word is ... ugly ? (Treeable?)
  -

This bundle also provides a service for serializing and unserializing trees, to and from strings such as `A(B,C(D))`.

Drivers provided :
  - Parenthesis : `A(B,C(D))`
  - Simple (dumb!) [timbre](https://github.com/mohayonao/timbre) : `T("*",T(6),T("sin",T(55.2)))`
  - Ascii

        A
        +--B
        |  +--C
        |  +--D
        |     +--E
        +--Fork

See the [Tests](https://github.com/Goutte/TreeBundle/tree/master/Tests/Driver) for more examples of what the Drivers support.


How to Use
==========

This is *not* for storing nested sets in the database, if that is what you are looking for you should be looking at
[Doctrine Extensions](https://github.com/l3pp4rd/DoctrineExtensions).
The original purpose of this bundle is to provide a toolset for reading/writing functional code,
or configuring the hierarchy of a menu in plain text for example.

Feel free to extend it to suit your needs, though.

Requirements
------------

This bundle requires PHP > 5.4

Install
-------

Add this bundle to your project using composer

    composer require goutte/tree-bundle


Service
-------

Use the service from the container :

``` php
    // get the serializer service
    $serializer = $container->get('goutte_tree.serializer');

    // this will create the nodes and return the root node
    $rootNode = $serializer->toNode('root(childA,childB(grandchildC))');

    // this will return the string for the subtree below the passed node
    $string = $serializer->toString($rootNode); // returns 'root(childA,childB(grandchildC))'

    // ... or use another driver
    $string = $serializer->useDriver('ascii')->toString($rootNode);
    // will return:
    // root
    // +--childA
    // +--childB
    //    +--grandchildC
```


See `Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Node` for a list of the methods provided by the abstract class `Goutte\TreeBundle\Model\AbstractNode`.


Using your own Node
-------------------


### Extending

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Model\Node as AbstractNode;
    class MyNode extends AbstractNode {
        // ...
    }
```


### Implementing

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Node as NodeInterface;
    class MyNode implements NodeInterface {
        // ...
    }
```

Then, configure the service to use your own Node class.


Writing a Driver
----------------

Implement `Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Driver` as follows :

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Driver;
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Factory\NodeFactoryInterface;

    class MyDriver implements Driver
    {
        protected $factory

        public function __construct(NodeFactoryInterface $factory)
        {
            $this->factory = $factory;
        }

        // ... implement Driver
    }
```

The `__construct` part is optional, but you'll probably want a NodeFactory to create Nodes.
We provide a default Node Factory as service, see the `<argument>` in the service definition below.

Add your driver to your `services.xml`, and tag it `goutte_tree.driver` :

``` xml
    <service id="goutte_tree.driver.mydriver" class="MyVendor\MyBundle\Driver\MyDriver" public="false">
        <argument type="service" id="goutte_tree.node.factory" />
        <tag name="goutte_tree.driver" />
    </service>
```

**(warn)** The service id will define the driver alias, so it needs to start with `goutte_tree.driver.`.
It is not the documented way of doing such a thing (which would be having an alias attribute in the tag), but it is a bit DRYer.
This may be subject to change later, I'm still making up my mind.

Configure the service to use your custom driver with `->useDriver()` :

``` php
    // Get the service, tell it to use your driver
    $serializer = $container->get('goutte_tree.serializer')->useDriver('mydriver');
```

You may skip usage of `->useDriver()` by telling the service to use your driver as default in the `services.xml` :

``` xml
    <tag name="goutte_tree.driver" default="true" />
```


Testing
=======

This bundle is ruthlessly tested, except for some service configuration exceptions (if you know how to test these, I'm all ears!)

Run composer with the `--dev` option so that the autoloader is created and the needed sf2 DIC classes are autoloaded.
_Oddly enough, when I tried to install with `--test` and `require-test` in the `composer.json`, I was sent packing. (pun intended)_

    composer install --dev

Then, simply run

    phpunit


Pitfalls
========

### Parenthesis Driver

Nodes with empty label can convert to string, but not back to node.

Eg: `A(B,C)` tree, if nodes' labels are emptied, will convert back to `(,)`

Envisioned solutions :
  - Throw on toString conversion if label is empty -> loss of feature
  - Tweak the toNode regex to allow empty labels -> disturbing as `A()` will create two nodes for example

### Timbre Driver

The nodes labels are not escaped by the driver, so no `(`, `)` or `,`.
As these characters are not used by Timbre's nodes, this should not be a problem.

Numerical labels must be encapsulated in `T()`, like so : `T(66.2)`.

### Ascii Driver

Linebreaks will be (un)escaped so that labels stay on one line in the string representation.

Because the reader expects *exactly 2* `-` as indentation, the Node label will hold the extra `-` if you add more.

Eg:

    A
    +---B

=> The child node's label will be `-B`, not `B`.


ChangeLog
=========


v1.0
----

- TreeIntegrityException
- DriverException
- Node base methods
- Path finding
- Tree integrity tests
- DIC for Drivers
- Documentation


v1.5
----

- Parenthesis driver
- Timbre driver
- AsciiDriver for multiline ascii rooted trees
- Node replacement with ->replaceBy()


v1.6
----

- Node cloning


v1.7.1
------

- ->getDescendants() (breadth-first TWA by default)
- ->getRandomDescendant($includeSelf=false)

v1.7.4
------

- Decoupling the Random util for easier/deeper deteministic testing
- ->removeChildren()

v1.7.5
------

- Usage of Factories in Drivers

RoadMap
=======

_These have no schedule, don't wait for them._


v1.8
----

- ->getAncestors()
- ->getRandomAncestor($includeSelf=false)

vX.0
----

- Empty labels in parenthesis driver
- Graph theory, see the [BLACKBOARD](https://github.com/Goutte/TreeBundle/blob/master/BLACKBOARD.markdown)
  - -> probably in another bundle
- Custom tree walking for tree flattening
  - breadth-first
  - depth-first

Commit message:

Cloning branch nodes with Tree()

README.markdown, after:

TreeBundle
==========

Let:

* Tree = Rooted Tree
* Node = Rooted Tree Node

The Tree structure is currently designed with only two models, the Node and the Tree.
The Tree is a Composite for the Node, and may compose with a variety of traits, the only one actually coded being ComposeWithRootNode.

Question: Proper Tree/Node hierarchy ?

- Tree extends Node
  - currently working
  - When expecting Tree (eg: drivers), cannot pass a Node
  - confusing, by stating a Tree *is* a Node.
- Node extends Tree
  - + correct, a Node *is* a (sub)Tree
  - + a Node has Tree capabilities
  - + don't need ComposeWithRootNode
  - + can pass a Node where a Tree is expected
  - - cannot pass a Tree where a Node is expected
  - - some method names don't make sense for Tree (getSibling, getParent, etc)
  - - Tree cannot have methods Node has not, like ... what ?
- Node extends Nodable and Tree extends Nodable
  - Nodable word is ... ugly ? (Treeable?)
  -

This bundle also provides a service for serializing and unserializing trees, to and from strings such as `A(B,C(D))`.

Drivers provided :
  - Parenthesis : `A(B,C(D))`
  - Simple (dumb!) [timbre](https://github.com/mohayonao/timbre) : `T("*",T(6),T("sin",T(55.2)))`
  - Ascii

        A
        +--B
        |  +--C
        |  +--D
        |     +--E
        +--Fork

See the [Tests](https://github.com/Goutte/TreeBundle/tree/master/Tests/Driver) for more examples of what the Drivers support.


How to Use
==========

This is *not* for storing nested sets in the database, if that is what you are looking for you should be looking at
[Doctrine Extensions](https://github.com/l3pp4rd/DoctrineExtensions).
The original purpose of this bundle is to provide a toolset for reading/writing functional code,
or configuring the hierarchy of a menu in plain text for example.

Feel free to extend it to suit your needs, though.

Requirements
------------

This bundle requires PHP > 5.4

Install
-------

Add this bundle to your project using composer

    composer require goutte/tree-bundle


Service
-------

Use the service from the container :

``` php
    // get the serializer service
    $serializer = $container->get('goutte_tree.serializer');

    // this will create the nodes and return the root node
    $rootNode = $serializer->toNode('root(childA,childB(grandchildC))');

    // this will return the string for the subtree below the passed node
    $string = $serializer->toString($rootNode); // returns 'root(childA,childB(grandchildC))'

    // ... or use another driver
    $string = $serializer->useDriver('ascii')->toString($rootNode);
    // will return:
    // root
    // +--childA
    // +--childB
    //    +--grandchildC
```


See `Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Node` for a list of the methods provided by the abstract class `Goutte\TreeBundle\Model\AbstractNode`.


Using your own Node
-------------------


### Extending

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Model\Node as AbstractNode;
    class MyNode extends AbstractNode {
        // ...
    }
```


### Implementing

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Node as NodeInterface;
    class MyNode implements NodeInterface {
        // ...
    }
```

Then, configure the service to use your own Node class.


Cloning
-------

Cloning is propagated to children recursively. You can clone root nodes to create whole new trees.
Do not clone branch nodes, though, because the parent of the clone will not have the clone as child.

    ``` php
    $clone = clone $myRootNode; // you can do this

    $clone = clone $myBranchNode; // you really should not do this
    $clone->setParent(null, false); // ... unless you do this too

    $clone = new Goutte\TreeBundle\Model\Tree($myBranchNode); // do this instead
    ```


Writing a Driver
----------------

Implement `Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Driver` as follows :

``` php
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Is\Driver;
    use Goutte\TreeBundle\Factory\NodeFactoryInterface;

    class MyDriver implements Driver
    {
        protected $factory

        public function __construct(NodeFactoryInterface $factory)
        {
            $this->factory = $factory;
        }

        // ... implement Driver
    }
```

The `__construct` part is optional, but you'll probably want a NodeFactory to create Nodes.
We provide a default Node Factory as service, see the `<argument>` in the service definition below.

Add your driver to your `services.xml`, and tag it `goutte_tree.driver` :

``` xml
    <service id="goutte_tree.driver.mydriver" class="MyVendor\MyBundle\Driver\MyDriver" public="false">
        <argument type="service" id="goutte_tree.node.factory" />
        <tag name="goutte_tree.driver" />
    </service>
```

**(warn)** The service id will define the driver alias, so it needs to start with `goutte_tree.driver.`.
It is not the documented way of doing such a thing (which would be having an alias attribute in the tag), but it is a bit DRYer.
This may be subject to change later, I'm still making up my mind.

Configure the service to use your custom driver with `->useDriver()` :

``` php
    // Get the service, tell it to use your driver
    $serializer = $container->get('goutte_tree.serializer')->useDriver('mydriver');
```

You may skip usage of `->useDriver()` by telling the service to use your driver as default in the `services.xml` :

``` xml
    <tag name="goutte_tree.driver" default="true" />
```




Testing
=======

This bundle is ruthlessly tested, except for some service configuration exceptions (if you know how to test these, I'm all ears!)

Run composer with the `--dev` option so that the autoloader is created and the needed sf2 DIC classes are autoloaded.
_Oddly enough, when I tried to install with `--test` and `require-test` in the `composer.json`, I was sent packing. (pun intended)_

    composer install --dev

Then, simply run

    phpunit


Pitfalls
========

### Parenthesis Driver

Nodes with empty label can convert to string, but not back to node.

Eg: `A(B,C)` tree, if nodes' labels are emptied, will convert back to `(,)`

Envisioned solutions :
  - Throw on toString conversion if label is empty -> loss of feature
  - Tweak the toNode regex to allow empty labels -> disturbing as `A()` will create two nodes for example

### Timbre Driver

The nodes labels are not escaped by the driver, so no `(`, `)` or `,`.
As these characters are not used by Timbre's nodes, this should not be a problem.

Numerical labels must be encapsulated in `T()`, like so : `T(66.2)`.

### Ascii Driver

Linebreaks will be (un)escaped so that labels stay on one line in the string representation.

Because the reader expects *exactly 2* `-` as indentation, the Node label will hold the extra `-` if you add more.

Eg:

    A
    +---B

=> The child node's label will be `-B`, not `B`.


ChangeLog
=========

v1.x works with php >= 5.3

v2.x works with php >= 5.4

v1.0
----

- TreeIntegrityException
- DriverException
- Node base methods
- Path finding
- Tree integrity tests
- DIC for Drivers
- Documentation


v1.5
----

- Parenthesis driver
- Timbre driver
- AsciiDriver for multiline ascii rooted trees
- Node replacement with ->replaceBy()


v1.6
----

- Node cloning


v1.7.1
------

- ->getDescendants() (breadth-first TWA by default)
- ->getRandomDescendant($includeSelf=false)

v1.7.4
------

- Decoupling the Random util for easier/deeper deteministic testing
- ->removeChildren()

v1.7.5
------

- Usage of Factories in Drivers

RoadMap
=======

_These have no schedule, don't wait for them._


v1.8
----

- ->getAncestors()
- ->getRandomAncestor($includeSelf=false)


v2.0
----

- Using Traits
- Added Tree model


vX.0
----

- Empty labels in parenthesis driver
- Graph theory, see the [BLACKBOARD](https://github.com/Goutte/TreeBundle/blob/master/BLACKBOARD.markdown)
  - -> probably in another bundle
- Custom tree walking for tree flattening
  - breadth-first
  - depth-first
